TILE -
CA2937322A1 - Chevron system for gas turbine engine 
      - Google Patents
Abstract -
 A surface-increasing feature system for a gas turbine engine comprising deployable surface-increasing features such as chevrons each defined by panels connected to a deployment mechanism providing a translational actuation to deploy said deployable surface-increasing feature from a stowed configuration concealed fore of a trailing edge of a case of the gas turbine engine, to a deployed configuration extending beyond the trailing edge. Joints provide one or more degree of freedom for the first panel and the second panel relative to the deployment mechanism. A guide operatively contacts the deployable surface-increasing feature to rotatably displace the first panel and the second panel away from one another in the at least one degree of freedom in response to movement induced by the translational actuation from the stowed configuration to the deployed configuration. A footprint of the deployable surface-increasing feature concurrently defined by the first panel and the second panel is greater in the deployed configuration than in the stowed configuration 
Claims - 



1.    A surface-increasing feature system for a gas turbine engine comprising:at least one deployable surface-increasing feature defined at least by a first panel and a second panel connected to a deployment mechanism providing a translational actuation to deploy said deployable surface-increasing feature from a stowed configuration in which the deployable surface-increasing feature is substantially concealed fore of a trailing edge of a case of the gas turbine engine, to a deployed configuration in which the deployable surface-increasing feature extends beyond the trailing edge;at least one joint providing at least one degree of freedom for the first panel and the second panel relative to the deployment mechanism; and a guide operatively contacting the deployable surface-increasing feature to rotatably displace the first panel and the second panel away from one another in the at least one degree of freedom in response to movement induced by the translational actuation from the stowed configuration to the deployed configuration;whereby a footprint of the deployable surface-increasing feature concurrently defined by the first panel and the second panel is greater in the deployed configuration than in the stowed configuration. 



2.    The surface-increasing feature system according to claim 1, wherein the first panel and the second panel lie in parallel planes. 



3.    The surface-increasing feature system according to any one of claims 1 and 2, wherein the at least one joint is rotational joints connecting the first panel and the second panel to the deployment mechanism, the rotational joints receiving the translational actuation. 



4.    The surface-increasing feature system according to claim 3, wherein axes of the rotational joints are transverse to a direction of the translational actuation. 



5.    The surface-increasing feature system according to any one of claims 1 to 4, further comprising at least one tie rod between the panels and the deployment mechanism, the tie rod pushing and pulling the panels as actuated by the translational actuation. 



6.    The surface-increasing feature system according to claim 5, wherein the at least one joint is at least one rotational joint connecting the first panel and the second panel to the at least one tie rod. 



7.    The surface-increasing feature system according to claim 6, comprising two of said at least one joint, wherein axes of the rotational joints are transverse to a direction of the translational actuation. 



8.    The surface-increasing feature system according to any one of claims 1 to 7, wherein the first panel and the second panel each have a trapezoid shape. 



9.    The surface-increasing feature system according to any one of claims 1 to 8, wherein the guide operatively contacts edges of the first panel and the second panel. 



10.    The surface-increasing feature system according to claim 9, wherein the guide has walls contacting said edges of the first panel and of the second panel, the walls concurrently forming a housing for the surface-increasing feature in the stowed configuration. 



11.    The surface-increasing feature system according to any one of claims 1 to 10, wherein the footprint of the surface-increasing feature flares beyond the trailing edge. 



12.    The surface-increasing feature system according to any one of claims 1 to 11, further comprising at least one biasing member biasing the panels to the deployed configuration. 



13.    A chevron system for a gas turbine engine comprising:at least one chevron defined by a pair of panels, each panel having at least two degrees of freedom, with one degree of freedom consisting of a rotational movement of said panel around a joint and another degree of freedom consisting of translational movement of said panel within a guide;a biasing member for biasing the panels in said rotational movement, wherein said rotational movement is restricted by the guide; and a deployment mechanism for moving each panel within the guide. 



14.    The chevron system according to claim 13, wherein each said guide has walls contacting said edges of the first panel and of the second panel, the walls concurrently forming the housing for the panels in the stowed configuration. 



15.    The chevron system according to any one of claims 13 and 14, further comprising at least one tie rod between the panels and the deployment mechanism. 



16.    The chevron system according to claim 15, wherein the joint is rotational joints connecting the first panel and the second panel to the at least one tie rod. 



17.    A method for deploying a pair of panels forming a surface-increasing feature at a trailing edge of a case of a gas turbine engine of an aircraft, comprising:receiving a translational actuation to move the surface-increasing feature beyond the trailing edge; and guiding the two panels in rotatably moving relative to one another as induced by the translational actuation to increase a footprint of the deployable surface-increasing feature concurrently defined by the first panel and the second panel. 



18.    The method according to claim 17, wherein guiding the two panels comprises rotating the two panels about axes transverse to a direction of the translational actuation. 



19.    The method according to any one of claims 17 and 18, wherein guiding the two panels comprises operatively contacting edges of the two panels. 



20.    The method according to any one of claims 17 to 19, wherein guiding the two panels comprises biasing the two panels in operative contact with a guide when increasing the footprint. 