TILE -
CA2968540C - Noise-mitigating transfer duct for active tip clearance control system of gas turbine engine 
      - Google Patents
Abstract -
A transfer duct and an associated active tip clearance control system of a gas turbine engine are disclosed. In one embodiment, the duct comprises: an upstream duct portion for fluid communication with an air source; a downstream duct portion for fluid communication with a manifold for directing the air toward a rotor case; and a noise-mitigating device disposed between the upstream duct portion and the downstream duct portion. The duct may define an abrupt change in internal cross sectional area between the upstream duct portion and the noise-mitigating device.
Claims - 



1.    An active tip clearance control system of a gas turbine engine, the system comprising:a duct having an inlet in fluid communication with an air source and an outlet, the duct comprising an upstream duct portion disposed upstream of a noise-mitigating expansion chamber and a downstream duct portion disposed downstream of the noise-mitigating expansion chamber, the upstream duct portion defining a first flow passage having a first cross-sectional area and the noise-mitigating expansion chamber defining a second flow passage in fluid communication with the first flow passage and having a second cross-sectional area larger than the first cross-sectional area;a valve configured to control air flow through the duct, the valve being disposed downstream of the duct; and a manifold in fluid communication with the outlet of the duct via the valve and configured to receive air from the duct when the valve is at least partially open, and direct the air toward a rotor case of the gas turbine engine. 



2.    The system as defined in claim 1, wherein the duct defines a discontinuity in flow passage cross-sectional area between the upstream duct portion and the noise-mitigating expansion chamber. 



3.    The system as defined in claim 1, wherein a length of the upstream duct portion is different from a length of the downstream duct portion. 



4.    The system as defined in claim 1, wherein the second cross-sectional area is at least two times greater than the first cross-sectional area. 



5.    The system as defined in claim 1, wherein the second cross-sectional area is about 2.5 times greater than the first cross-sectional area. 



6.    The system as defined in claim 1, wherein the downstream duct portion defines a third flow passage in fluid communication with the second flow passage and having a third cross-sectional area smaller than the second cross-sectional area, the duct defining a discontinuity in flow passage cross-sectional area between the noise-mitigating expansion chamber and the downstream duct portion. 



7.    The system as defined in claim 6, wherein the first cross-sectional area and the third cross-sectional area are substantially equal. 



8.    The system as defined in claim 1, wherein the source of air comprises a core gas path of the gas turbine engine. 



9.    An active tip clearance control system of a gas turbine engine, the system comprising:a duct having an inlet in fluid communication with an air source and an outlet, the duct comprising an upstream duct portion disposed upstream of a noise-mitigating device and a downstream duct portion disposed downstream of the noise-mitigating device, the upstream duct portion defining a first flow passage having a first cross-sectional area and the noise-mitigating device defining a second flow passage in fluid communication with the first flow passage and having a second cross-sectional area different from the first cross-sectional area, the duct defining a discontinuity in flow passage cross-sectional area between the upstream duct portion and the noise-mitigating device;a valve configured to control air flow through the duct, the valve being disposed downstream of the duct; and a manifold in fluid communication with the outlet of the duct via the valve and configured to receive air from the duct when the valve is at least partially open, and direct the air toward a rotor case of the gas turbine engine. 



10.    The system as defined in claim 9, wherein a length of the upstream duct portion is different from a length of the downstream duct portion. 



11.    The system as defined in claim 9, wherein the second cross-sectional area is at least two times greater than the first cross-sectional area. 



12.    The system as defined in claim 9, wherein the second cross-sectional area is about 40% of the first cross-sectional area. 



13.    The system as defined in claim 9, wherein the second cross-sectional area is equal to or smaller than about 50% of the first cross-sectional area. 



14.    The system as defined in claim 9, wherein the downstream duct portion defines a third flow passage in fluid communication with the second flow passage and having a third cross-sectional area different from the second cross-sectional area, the duct defining a discontinuity in flow passage cross-sectional area between the noise-mitigating device and the downstream duct portion. 



15.    The system as defined in claim 14, wherein the first cross-sectional area and the third cross-sectional area are substantially equal. 



16.    The system as defined in claim 9, wherein the source of air comprises a core gas path of the gas turbine engine. 



17.    A transfer duct of an active tip clearance control system of a gas turbine engine, the duct comprising:an upstream duct portion for fluid communication with an air source, the upstream duct portion defining a first flow passage having a first cross-sectional area;a downstream duct portion for fluid communication with a manifold for directing the air toward a rotor case; and a noise-mitigating device disposed between the upstream duct portion and the downstream duct portion, the noise-mitigating device defining a second flow passage in fluid communication with the first flow passage and having a second cross-sectional area different from the first cross-sectional area, the duct defining a discontinuity in flow-passage cross-sectional area between the upstream duct portion and the noise-mitigating device. 



18.    The transfer duct as defined in claim 17, wherein the second cross-sectional area is at least two times greater than the first cross-sectional area. 



19.    The transfer duct as defined in claim 17, wherein the second cross-sectional area is equal to or smaller than about 50% of the first cross-sectional area. 



20.    The transfer duct as defined in claim 17, wherein the downstream duct portion defines a third flow passage in fluid communication with the second flow passage and having a third cross-sectional area different from the second cross-sectional area, the duct defining a discontinuity in flow passage cross-sectional area between the noise-mitigating device and the downstream duct portion. 